Pressure escalated inside the United States for a grounding of the Boeing 737 Max model that has crashed twice in the past six months. But the Federal Aviation Administration reiterated its position that the plane is considered safe and that it has “no basis to order grounding the aircraft.”

The European Union suspended “all flight operations” of the Boeing 737 Max model in question. The action came as more than a half-dozen other countries grounded the plane, and was the most sweeping regulatory action taken so far in the two days since the crash of a Max 8 that killed 157 people on a flight from Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, to Nairobi, Kenya.

President Trump had a telephone conversation with the chief executive of Boeing, who made the case that the 737 Max 8 should not be grounded in the United States, according to two people briefed on the conversation.

Mr. Trump also said on Twitter that commercial airplanes had become overly technical, but said nothing about the Boeing Max.

At least 34 airlines have now grounded the Max 8, which means roughly two-thirds of the Max 8 planes in operation are now idled. The major outliers are Southwest and American in the United States, and Air Canada.

Boeing stands by the airworthiness of the plane, but said it planned to issue a software update and was working on changes to flight controls and training guidelines following the first crash, of a Lion Air flight in Indonesia last October.

Boeing’s stock price, which fell 5 percent on Monday, fell 6 percent on Tuesday.

Investigators from the United States and elsewhere are at the crash site of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. Much of the investigation will focus on the voice and data recorders recovered on Monday. The airline’s chief executive, interviewed by CNN, said the pilots had told air traffic control they were having “flight control problems.”
The European Union’s aviation regulatory agency barred flights of the Max 8, as well as a slightly newer model, the Max 9, joining several other regulators around the world.

The action, which includes all flights over European Union territory, came as India, France, Germany, Britain, Ireland, Australia, Singapore, Malaysia and Oman joined China and Indonesia in suspending all use of the plane.

The European Union regulator, known as EASA, said the action included the suspension of “all commercial flights performed by third-country operators into, within or out of the E.U.” of the Max 8 and Max 9.

The decision could disrupt travel not only through the heart of Europe but well beyond, as many commercial flight routes go over European Union territory. Still, the extent of the disruption is unclear.

Airlines and passengers will be affected as companies scramble to ensure that passengers can still get to their destinations, but the impact will depend on how much of their fleets are made up of the grounded planes, said Andrew Charlton, the managing director at Aviation Advocacy, an air transport consultancy based in Switzerland.

By Wednesday morning, the groundings spread. Fiji Airways said it had grounded all of its Max 8 planes and would try to accommodate passengers using other aircraft.

New Zealand’s Civil Aviation Authority said Wednesday it had banned the Boeing 737 Max 8 planes from its airspace, citing uncertainty about the cause of the Ethiopian Airlines crash. The grounding affected only one airline, Fiji, which had its next New Zealand flight scheduled for Thursday afternoon.

Pilots reported ‘flight control problems,’ airline C.E.O. says
The pilots of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 reported to air traffic control that they were having “flight control problems” in the moments before the crash, the airline’s chief executive was quoted as saying in an interview with CNN.

The quoted remarks from the chief executive, Tewolde GebreMariam, suggested the plane had not responded to actions by the pilots.

Mr. GebreMariam was also quoted as saying the black boxes recovered from the wreckage “will be sent overseas” and not analyzed in Ethiopia. He did not specify where they would be taken.

Trump speaks to Boeing C.E.O., who urges no grounding
On Tuesday morning, Dennis A. Muilenburg, the chief executive of Boeing, spoke to President Trump on the phone and argued that the Max should not be grounded in the United States, according to two people briefed on the conversation. A Boeing official said that during the call with the president, “Dennis reiterated our position that the Max is a safe aircraft.”

Mr. Muilenburg has worked to cultivate a relationship with the president, but it has sometimes been an uneasy one.

Shortly after becoming president-elect, Mr. Trump assailed Boeing for the estimated cost of its program to build new Air Force One planes, which provide mobile command centers for the president.

The “costs are out of control, more than $4 billion. Cancel order!” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter a month after winning the election. A couple of weeks later, Mr. Muilenburg visited Mr. Trump at his Mar-a-Lago club in Palm Beach, Fla., to try to smooth things over.

“It was a terrific conversation,” Mr. Muilenburg told reporters after the meeting, explaining that he had given Mr. Trump “my personal commitment” that Boeing would build new Air Force One planes for less than the $4 billion estimate. Weeks afterward, Boeing donated $1 million to Mr. Trump’s inaugural committee. The company had donated the same amount to help fund President Barack Obama’s 2013 inauguration.

Mr. Trump also publicly lamented on Tuesday what he described as excessive technology that has overtaken modern commercial jet travel and made it, in his view, more dangerous.

Without specifying Boeing or the Max 8, Mr. Trump said aircraft had become “far too complex to fly,” and recalled approvingly the era when pilots had total control in the cockpit.

“Split second decisions are needed, and the complexity creates danger,” Mr. Trump said in a pair of postings on Twitter. “All this for great cost yet very little gain. I don’t know about you, but I don’t want Albert Einstein to be my pilot. I want great flying professionals that are allowed to easily and quickly take control of a plane!”

Pilots and aviation experts have said repeatedly that flying is now safer than it has ever been.
